# cintel-05-cintel
## Author: Arnold Atchoe
## Date: 11/24/2024

## Project Description

The goal of this project is to create an interactive dashboard app that allows users to 
visualize live data. Data presented include Palmer Penguins dataset and temperature a various times in Antarctica. This project made use of shiny for python and GitHub
pages to achieve its goal.

## Data Description

Dataset contains facts about three species of penguins observed on three island in Palmer Archipelago, 
Antarctica. The data has been made available by Dr. Kristen Gorman and the Palmer Station, Antarctica LTER, 
a member of the Long Term Ecological Research Network.

Column names for the penguins dataset include:

    species: penguin species (Chinstrap, Adelie, or Gentoo)
    island: island name (Dream, Torgersen, or Biscoe) in the Palmer Archipelago
    bill_length_mm: length of the bill in millimeters
    bill_depth_mm: depth of the bill in millimeters
    flipper_length_mm: length of the flipper in millimeters
    body_mass_g **: body mass in grams
    sex: MALE or FEMALE

Temperature of Antarctica presented within the web app was generate randomly.

## Data Cleaning and transformation

Dataset has some missing values. To ensure accurate analysis, rows with at least one  
column of missing data is deleted.  

## Project Execution

### Prep Development Environment
Determine and prepare the tools require to execute project successfully.

1. Install latest version of python.
2. Install latest version of Git for version control.
3. Install VS Code as a Code editor.
4. Download and enable python and shiny extension for VS Code.
5. Create and activate python project virtual environment(.venv). Virtual enivroment keep
project dependencies exclusive.  
```py -m venv .venv```  
```.venv\Scripts\activate```  
6. Install project dependencies and libraries.  
```py -m pip install -r requirements.txt```  
The requirements.txt file contains a list of all projedct dependencies to allow for easy installation.  

#### Notes(In terminal):
1. Configure git with username and email used in github with the following lines of code;  
```git config --global user.name "Your Name"```  
```git config --global user.email "youremail@example.com"```  
2. Check python version, Git version and confriguration with following lines of code;  
 ```py --version```  
```git --version```  
 ```git config user.name```  
 ```git config user.email```  

### Run App
Launch app in web browser by running ```shiny run --reload --launch-browser penguins/app.py``` in terminal.  
Terminal becomes occupied after running this code hence another terminal must be used for other tasks.  

### Build App to Docs folder and Test locally.
Keep virtual environment active for this step.  

1. Remove any existing static assets using terminal command ```shiny static-assets remove```.  
2. Export the contents of penguins folder to docs folder to build a web app using shinylive export.  
    Docs folder is created if it does not exist. Terminal command used is  
```shinylive export dashboard docs```  
3. Edit index.html file to modify web app browser tab to include custom title and favicon.Favicon used was generate on  
    (https://favicon.io/).(https://favicon.io/) provides instructions on implement favicons. Section of index.html edited  
    is shown below;  
```<title>Arnold Atchoe-Palmer Penguins in Antartica</title>```  
```<link rel="icon" type="image/x-icon" href="./favicon.ico">```  
4. Test app in browser using the link generated by terminal command  
 ```py -m http.server --directory docs --bind localhost 8008```.  
 
 Note: Push app to GitHub Repo before publishing
### Publish App with GitHub Pages
GitHub pages hosts this web application. An initial confriguration is done to setup pages for repository 
containing the web app. After, any subsequent update pushed to repository will be reflected in the web 
application.  

 1. Go the settings tab of the web app repository.  
 2. Scroll to the bottom of the page and click the pages section.  
 3. Select branch main as the source for the site.  
 4. Change from the root folder to the docs folder as publishing source.  
 5. Click Save and wait for the site to build.  
 6. Edit the "About" section of the repository to include a link to the live app.  

## Resoruces  

Palmer Penguins published in:  

Horst AM, Hill AP, Gorman KB (2020). palmerpenguins: Palmer Archipelago (Antarctica) penguin data.  
R package version 0.1.0. https://allisonhorst.github.io/palmerpenguins/. doi: 10.5281/zenodo.3960218.  

Data originally published in:  

Gorman KB, Williams TD, Fraser WR (2014). Ecological sexual dimorphism and environmental variability within a  
community of Antarctic penguins (genus Pygoscelis). PLoS ONE 9(3):e90081. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0090081  
The Shiny development team. Shiny for Python [Computer software]. https://github.com/posit-dev/py-shiny.  

